During a press conference, state Chief Secretary Rajiva Sinha said the state government will impose a 14-day ‘total lockdown’ in 10 hotspots from where several COVID-19 cases have been reported.

The opposition Congress and CPI (M) supported Banerjee’s decision to extend the lockdown but said the state government should take proper steps to ensure relief materials reach people.

The chief minister said she has urged the central government to ensure a strict vigil in border areas so that no one is able to sneak in during the lockdown period.

The chief minister said the state government has decided to grant relaxation to some sectors, but everybody has to adhere to the norms and regulations laid down by the health department.

The West Bengal government on Saturday announced the extension of the lockdown till April 30 and closure of all educational institutes till June 10 as the state registered six new COVID-19 cases, taking the total to 122.

On Tuesday, she had said that her government has identified seven COVID-19 hotspots in the state and it was taking measures to break the chain of transmission.

The Centre is considering a request made by most states to extend the ongoing nationwide lockdown by two more weeks beyond April 14 after Modi interacted with chief ministers and told them that focus should be now on health as well as prosperity of the nation.

The report of complete lockdown in some parts of the state led to panic buying as people in large numbers queued outside shops to stock up essential commodities in Dum Dum, Nagerbazar, Bhawanipore and Alipore.

Though the chief secretary did not name the areas, he said local markets and all roads in those areas will be completely shut down, and no one will be allowed to enter or step out of their homes.

During the interaction with the prime minister, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee demanded financial aid for the state and Rs 10 lakh crores relief package for the states.

Banerjee said that she has informed the prime minister that a few Union ministers and a section of people are spreading “canards and fake news” about COVID-19 situation in the state.

Her comments came in the backdrop of allegations by Union ministers and BJP leaders that the state government was trying to hide COVID-19 figures, especially the number of deaths.

